Add PromQL reference docs for HTTP API and limitations (#148783)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/query-languages/promql/promql-http-api.md

::::

These endpoints run under the `/_prometheus/` prefix.
They are intended for **Prometheus-compatible** tooling such as Grafana data sources, autocompletion, variable queries, and similar clients.

Expect metric data to be stored in {{es}} as [time series data streams](docs-content://manage-data/data-store/data-streams/time-series-data-stream-tsds.md) (TSDS).

## How requests are executed [promql-http-api-execution]

For every supported route, {{es}} turns the incoming HTTP parameters into an **{{esql}}** plan, executes it through the same {{esql}} runtime used elsewhere, and converts the tabular response into Prometheus-style JSON (`resultType`, `result` arrays, and similar).

See [Limitations](promql-limitations.md) for what is not supported yet and how behavior differs from Prometheus.

## Index scoping [promql-http-api-index-scope]

Every path has two forms:

- **Cluster default:** `GET /_prometheus/api/v1/...`
- **Explicit index expression:** `GET /_prometheus/{index}/api/v1/...`

The `{index}` segment is an {{es}} index expression (for example, `metrics-prod-*`) that restricts which indices participate **before** expression evaluation or metadata collection.

> That pre-filter keeps work focused when many unrelated [time series data streams](docs-content://manage-data/data-store/data-streams/time-series-data-stream-tsds.md) (TSDS) exist in the cluster and usually improves latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That pre-filter reduces the input size when many unrelated [time series data streams](docs-content://manage-data/data-store/data-streams/time-series-data-stream-tsds.md) (TSDS) exist in the cluster, improving latency and keeping resource consumption at bay.
```

> When you omit `{index}` in the path, every route uses the default index expression **`metrics-*`** (the {{esql}} `PROMQL` default).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you omit `{index}` in the path, qualifying indices are identified through the default index expression **`metrics-*`** (the {{esql}} `PROMQL` default).
```

## `limit` [promql-http-api-limit]

> `limit` defaults to **`0`**, which means **no cap from the request** (Prometheus-style unlimited). The server may still truncate very large responses; see [`esql.query.result_truncation_max_size`](/reference/query-languages/esql/limitations.md#esql-max-rows).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`limit` defaults to **`0`**, which means **no cap from the request** (Prometheus-style unlimited). The server may still truncate very large responses; see [`esql.query.timeseries_result_truncation_max_size `](/reference/query-languages/esql/limitations.md#esql-max-rows).
```

Reviewer: Let's also update that page to include both `TS` and `PROMQL`.

Author: Done: limit paragraph points at the truncation setting with a clean link label, and the ES|QL result-size snippet now covers TS, PROMQL, and the PromQL HTTP API for the timeseries_result_truncation_* settings.

## Query endpoints [promql-http-api-query-endpoints]

> ### Range query: `query_range` [promql-http-api-query-range]

Reviewer: For each of these, it may help to include a link to prometheus documentation, so that they can be matched 1-1.

Author: Done: short pointer under Query endpoints to the Prometheus HTTP API doc, plus matching deep links on each route subsection.

`GET /_prometheus/api/v1/query_range`\
`GET /_prometheus/{index}/api/v1/query_range`

Evaluates a PromQL expression over a time window and returns **matrix** data (`resultType: "matrix"`).

| Parameter | Required | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `query` | Yes | PromQL expression |
| `start` | Yes | Range start (Prometheus-compatible timestamp) |
| `end` | Yes | Range end |
| `step` | Yes | Resolution / step width |
| `limit` | No (default: `0`) | Maximum number of series returned |

> The `timeout`, `lookback_delta`, and `stats` parameters are not supported yet (see [Limitations](promql-limitations.md)).

Reviewer: and ignored? no errors if included, correct?

Author: We do throw errors at the moment. We can change it but we'd then silently ignore those parameters which may not be great either.

### Instant query: `query` [promql-http-api-query-instant]

`GET /_prometheus/api/v1/query`\
`GET /_prometheus/{index}/api/v1/query`

Evaluates at a single instant and returns **vector** data (`resultType: "vector"`).

| Parameter | Required | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `query` | Yes | PromQL expression |
| `time` | No (default: now) | Evaluation instant; the handler still uses an internal **5 minute** range ending at this time (see [Limitations](promql-limitations.md)) |
| `limit` | No (default: `0`) | Maximum number of series returned |

The `timeout`, `lookback_delta`, and `stats` parameters are not supported yet (see [Limitations](promql-limitations.md)).

## Metadata and discovery endpoints [promql-http-api-metadata]

> These routes mirror Prometheus **metadata**, **labels**, **label values**, and **series** APIs so UIs can browse metrics, build selectors, and populate template variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These entrypoints mirror Prometheus **metadata**, **labels**, **label values**, and **series** APIs so UIs can browse metrics, build selectors, and populate template variables.
```
